# PPOL 563: Final Project - International Debt Statistics
## Fall 2020
### Allen Church

## Summary

Each year, the world generates trillions of dollars in debt. To low and middle-income countries, these monetary flows are a critical source of credit to finance and complete various projects to develop and diversify their economies. In 2019 alone, the 120 low and middle-income countries around the globe generated $8.1 trillion of external debt. Every year, The World Bank collects data from these low and middle-income countries and publishes them in International Debt Statistics. In 2020, The World Bank - due to global financial shocks from COVID-19 and combined with a renewed emphasis on debt transparency - for the first time released individual creditor countries within International Debt Statistics. Users can view the interactive map at the bottom of the page to visualize these newly released creditor country breakdowns. Previously, such data was only available at a generalized ‘creditor region’ level. Such a release provides a tremendous level of granularity, which economic and public policy analysts can use to examine relationships between the 120 low and middle-income countries of the world.

As new creditors emerge around the world, these stocks of external debt will continue to rise - as they have in the last decade. For example, China - itself a middle-income country - has greatly increased its lending to low and middle-income countries in the last 20 years. Generated by Tableau, the interactive charts and maps in this report will examine how the creditor profiles of two regions - Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa - have changed in the last 20 years.


## Relationship between debt distress and exports

<iframe seamless frameborder="0" src="https://public.tableau.com/views/Exports_to_debt_final/Dashboard1?:embed=yes&:display_count=yes&:showVizHome=no" width = '100%' height = '950' scrolling='yes' ></iframe>

Using this interactive map, users can view a generated ‘debt distress rating’ for a selection of low and middle-income countries. One can examine the relationship between a country’s level of indebtedness, and see how it relates to their diversity of export categories. Specifically, this rating compares the ratio at which a country uses export revenues to pay off its public external debt. Typically, if a country experiences declining export revenues and increasing levels of external debt, it is headed towards an unsustainable debt profile. In addition to this, some scholars assert that commodity-dependent economies over-borrow in times of high export revenues, leading to burdensome external debt in later years (Edo, 2020) For example, if you click on Brazil, you can easily see a diversity of export categories such as fuels, food, and agricultural products. Governments will typically use a fraction of these export revenues to pay off loans owed to other countries. Using the bar chart on the right, one can examine a country’s history of export diversification for the last 20 years.

## Japan remains preferred lender in Southeast Asia

<iframe seamless frameborder="0" src="https://public.tableau.com/views/Top5LenderstoSoutheastAsia/top_5_lenders_chart?:embed=yes&:display_count=yes&:showVizHome=no" width = ‘100%’ height = '450' scrolling='yes' ></iframe

Southeast Asia consists of 12 countries and a population of 655 million [United Nations](https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Files/1_Indicators%20(Standard)/EXCEL_FILES/1_Population/WPP2019_POP_F01_1_TOTAL_POPULATION_BOTH_SEXES.xlsx). However, as of 2020, only one country in the region, Indonesia, is a member of the Group of 20 - larger markets that represent 80% of the international economy [G20](https://www.g20.org/en/il-g20.html). In 2019, the region of Southeast Asia accounted for almost $435 billion of public, external debt owed to the rest of the world. To illustrate the concept of public external debt: suppose the government of the Philippines wants to upgrade public transportation in metropolitan Manila. To finance such a project, they could use a combination of domestic funds - such as transportation taxes - as well as through loans from overseas. If the Philippine government officially guarantees to pay such an overseas loan, it becomes public external debt. As seen in the chart, countries in Southeast Asia have traditionally borrowed money from Japan - which lent a record high $83 billion to the region in 2011. However, it is interesting to observe the emergence of China as the second highest lender in the region. In 1999, after lending a relatively low amount of $1.3 billion in public debt, China has rapidly emerged as the second highest lender in 2019 - with an impressive $17.5 billion to the region. However, as of 2019, Japan remains the region’s top creditor - shelling out $51 billion to Southeast Asian governments and public corporations. 

## Chinese lending to Sub-Saharan Africa

<iframe seamless frameborder="0" src="https://public.tableau.com/views/Top5LenderstoSub-SaharanAfrica/top_5_lenders_chart??:embed=yes&:display_count=yes&:showVizHome=no" width = ‘100%’ height = '450' scrolling='yes' ></iframe

Sub-Saharan Africa is an incredibly diverse region, both geographically and culturally. Combined, the region’s 46 countries have a massive population, and quickly growing economies. According to the United Nations, Sub-Saharan Africa’s population as of 2019 is approximately 1.1 billion people in 2019 [United Nations](https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Files/1_Indicators%20(Standard)/EXCEL_FILES/1_Population/WPP2019_POP_F01_1_TOTAL_POPULATION_BOTH_SEXES.xlsx). In 2019, the region of Sub-Saharan Africa borrowed for a total of almost $599 billion in public external debt. In terms of top creditors since 1999, the region traditionally borrowed from France as an official creditor country. This changed after 2009, when China became the top creditor to the region, a position which it still holds as of 2019. In terms of lending, China has grown from lending a relatively low $1.5 billion in 1999, to almost $67 billion in 2019. Looking at the chart, China is by far the largest creditor to Sub-Saharan Africa, followed by the United States with $26 billion.
